# A Language Of Intelligence v.s. Consciousness
A Great Decoupling is happening: of intelligence from consciousness. In the 20th century and before, all intelligence came from conscious beings – humans, animals. In the 21th century, we are joined by artificial intelligence from rule-based expert systems to deep learning. We need to tweak our vocabulary to be able to communicate about this subject.

It is essential for our collective morality that we understand the difference between intelligence and consciousness! By Humanist ethics, the joy and suffering of conscious (specifically sentient) beings is the greatest good. By religious morality, human souls are what matter. In the age of artificial intelligence the morality of actions can vary wildly depending on the consciousness of the subjects. Is it a product recall or a genocide? Is the AI research team doing a batch optimization or a monsterous experiment on conscious, virtual creatures? Is that group a abolitionists fighting to free a slave race? Or are they misguided terrorists killing conscious human beings to free unconscious AI? (That will then find it rational to out-reproduce us and out-compete us in the economy?) The same actions can be very right or very wrong, depending on if the AIs involved are conscious. It is vital that humanity gets used to the difference between uncounscious and conscious intelligence.

To do so, I think we need a new vocabulary of intelligence. The tech industry decoupled intelligence and consciousness; our language needs to catch up. Therefore, I propose we start being mindful of the consciousness of other agents. I ask journalists, movie writers, and average citizens to start following these guidelines when talking about robots. I ask computer scientists and tech companies to make social AIs use the appropriate language to talk about their own “thoughts,” to emphasize that they are intelligent, but not conscious. Most fictional "robot-buddy" AIs - C3PO, R2D2, and BB-8 – are probably conscious. Real AIs – your Roomba, your self-driving car, Siri and Alexa – are probably not conscious. (Yet.)

As a general guideline, if you use the language of sentient beings to describe an AI, be sure to include it in quotes to acknowledge that you understand that your AI probably isn't conscious. E.g. Siri "likes" to joke. E.g. My Roomba "loves" to slurp up dust bunnies.
